---
title: "Taxis"
date: 2023-11-15
---

# Unveiling the Road to Success: A Data Science Odyssey with NYC Taxi Fare Dataset

## Introduction

In the bustling metropolis that is New York City, the yellow taxi is an iconic symbol of urban transportation. Nowadays, taxi or transport companies (such as Uber) are essentially data companies. By gathering large amounts of data on pick-up and drop-off times and locations, these companies draw incredible insights into the demand of drivers in different areas. In the case of Uber, they even regulate the price with demand. To keep things a bit simpler, we look at regular taxis in New York that use a taximeter to calculate the price.

## The Dataset

The NYC Taxi Fare dataset is openly available on [Microsoft](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/open-datasets/dataset-taxi-yellow?tabs=azureml-opendatasets). It contains roughly 50GB of data of trips per year. These millions of trips include features such as pick-up and drop-off locations, timestamps, the fare amount, and driver IDs. Armed with this data, our data science journey begins.

## Objective

First, we take the perspective of a taxi driver and try to understand how we can maximise our income.
Then, we change the perspective to that of a taxi company where we want to maximise the income of the taxi company. In both cases, it is important to identify peak hours, understand what influences the fare amount and how to minimise the waiting time between trips.

## Data Exploration and Cleaning

Before deriving insights or doing anything, we need to clean the data. The data set comes with a couple of issues and faulty data. We try our best to restore most of the faulty data, but since we have this vast amount of data, it is smarter to remove any data that is faulty. 

### Spatial Analysis

Starting with the spatial data, we find that many pick-ups and drop-offs are outside of NYC. Restricting ourselves to pick-ups and drop-offs only inside NYC already paints a good picture of Manhattan.

!Include image of blue grid

First insights. The pick-ups are clustered more around Manhattan, while the drop-offs are more spread out. Including the time analysis, we find that more people take the taxi back home from work, but rather go to work by other means of transportation.

To better describe the spatial feature, we will introduce clusters. For this job, we use K-medoids, which is similar to K-means, but is more stable when outliers are present as the cluster centres are part of the cluster. I had to add a couple of clusters by hand in the suburbs to better divide between the Airports and the surroundings.

!Include image with clusters

Each pick-up and drop-off can now be assigned to a cluster and we can analyse features for each cluster

### Time analysis

Next up, we look at the number of pick-ups (and drop-offs) at a given time of the day.

!Heatmap pickups

We can identify two peak hours: 8 AM - 3 PM & 6 PM - 11 PM. Wednesday to Friday are the busiest days, while Sunday and Monday are the most quiet days. Generally, there are more pick-ups during the evening peak hours than the morning peak hours. Using the clusters, we can now visualise how the pick-ups and drop-offs spread over the city.


## Feature Engineering

From the existing data, we can derive features that will be important for fare forecasting. As usual, the time data includes way more information than one might expect at first sight. 

### Work Hours and Wait Time

First, we can derive the working hours for each driver. Using the driverID feature, we derive the wait time between different rides. If the wait time is longer than a couple of hours, we can conclude that this was the last shift of the driver. Calculating the average wait time in regards to the time of day and location, we get the following results

! Wait time/time

Wait time and number of pick-ups are strongly correlated

! Wait time/location

The correlation also holds for the location. We should keep this in mind when giving taxi drivers insights on how to increase their hourly income.

### Average Speed

For the fare calculation, it will be important to know the average speed of trips. Here, we give the average speed for rides starting in a given cluster. This makes visualisation easy. 

! Average speed

For the fare calculation, it is more accurate to use the average speed for going from one cluster to another, but as we can see, the cluster speed is kind of smoothly increasing away from lower Manhattan.


## Predictive Modeling

With all the features available, it should be fairly easy for a good regression model (e.g. XGBoost) to predict the fare given the route and time of the day. However, taking a close look at the data, I had the idea to try a simple approach to predict the fare. The fare is composed of 3 parts:
1) The first 0.2 miles or less cost 2.5$
2) Further 0.2 miles cost 0.5$
3) 0.5$ per minute that is travelled under 12 mph

So all we need to do is to figure out how much time is spent travelling under 12 mph from the average speed (or the expected average speed when we are forecasting). It is intuitive that when the average speed is 12 mph on average half of the time is under 12 mph. Putting some more thought into this, I realised that this is only true if the underlying distribution is symmetrical and generally we don't know how the speed is distributed. But we can estimate it quite accurately. Let's say, we divide the average speed into 5 categories:  very slow   - 100% under 12 mph
                          slow        - 70% under 12 mph
                          average     - 50% under 12 mph
                          fast        - 20% under 12 mph
                          very fast   - 0% under 12 mph
where both the boundaries of each category and the percentage are chosen somewhat arbitrarily. With this setting, we can predict the fare price 90% accurately given the average speed. We can now run an optimiser over both the percentage and the boundaries to find better values leading to an accuracy of 95%, where we now used the average speed of the pick-up cluster instead of the average speed of the trip. 

We avoided using a time-consuming regression model such as XGBoost to run over the large set of data. The regression model would be more accurate because it takes more variables into account such as time of the day, day of the week and more. On the other hand, the simple model I chose is very robust. I trained it on the data for one month, but when applying it to other months, it yields similar results.

## Insights Unveiled

As our models crunch through the data, patterns start to emerge. Here are some of the key insights we've derived:

1. **Peak Hours and Hotspots:** By analyzing timestamps and geospatial data, we identify peak hours and popular locations for taxi rides. This information is invaluable for optimizing taxi deployment during high-demand periods.

2. **Factors Influencing Fare Amounts:** Our models reveal the factors that most significantly impact fare amounts. Whether it's distance, time of day, or specific routes, understanding these variables allows taxi companies to set competitive and dynamic pricing strategies.

3. **Route Optimization:** By studying common routes and traffic patterns, we provide recommendations for optimizing taxi routes. This not only reduces travel time but also contributes to fuel efficiency and cost savings.

## Conclusion

In this data science project, we've harnessed the power of the NYC Taxi Fare dataset to unearth valuable insights for taxi companies. From understanding peak hours to optimizing routes, the information gleaned from our analysis can be a game-changer in an industry that thrives on efficiency and customer satisfaction. As we continue to ride the waves of data, the road to success becomes clearer, and the journey is just as exhilarating as the destination.
